---
layout: post
title: Updated New Entry with 2 images
---
Updated netlify entry. 

{% include image-full.html file="/2016/2/ideo-0.JPG" alt="demo caption" height="400px" type="full"%}

{% include image-full.html file="/2017/1/nng-room.jpg" alt="Training Room" height="500px" type="full"%}

This is example text. Many exercises, activities and games use in applied improvisation are designed to encourage risk taking, playfulness, team building and to be in the moment. In this way, participants could challenge their existing mindset, develop their creative potential and overtime increase their confidence while having fun.

<!--more-->

This is example more text.  

Many exercises, activities and games use in applied improvisation are designed to encourage risk taking, playfulness, team building and to be in the moment. In this way, participants could challenge their existing mindset, develop their creative potential and overtime increase their confidence while having fun.

Belina highlighted the core practice of improvisation as described by Robert Poynton’s “Everything’s an Offer”: to let go (mindset or practices that not serving us at the moment), notice more (well being, others, and resources that we have) and use everything that comes - all done using “Yes, And” attitude in the service of change. She designed the workshop for changemakers based following topics: Useful mindsets for the ‘inner game’ of creating change Practicing the art of engaging others to create better solutions Deep listening, acting on intuition, and using short turn taking as a way to navigate complex adaptive systems.