---
layout: post
title: "PTL #1 - Anatomy of a Meetup"
category: workshop
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

<p class='sublead'>“Understanding The Circle Way and TBR ”</p>

<!--more-->
{% include image-full.html file="/2021/05/ptl1-1.JPG" alt="Topic"  caption="Meetup Circle"  %}

Facilitated by Mic, Mul and Ignas

## Designing PTL Meetup 

- PTL Cohort Participant to volunteers in a trio  to design and facilitate a topic of their choice
- Attend pre-brief and rehearsal with program coach 2 weeks before meetup: Cactus Team work on runsheet, ideas and overall design for the meetup deciding on their individual roles.
- Design meetup based on 4C Instructional Design Model, adapting provided materials to team's learning goals
- Facilitate 2H meetup with the cohort
- Post-meetup debrief with program coach and journal about lessons learnt practicing different coaching stances in teaching, facilitating, coaching and mentoring.

## The Circle Way
Established by Christina Baldwin and Ann Linnea, The Circle Way is a group process / methodology that have been designed with the purpose of sustaining meaningful dialogue. This process is co-facilitated / held with three points of leadership. 

- **Driver**: issues the invitation, helps define the scope and then participates in the conversation from a position of peer leadership. 
- **Guardian**: helps the driver and circle stay centered and intentional. 
- **Scribe**: helps captures insights, decisions, and actions.

The process help shifts Informal socializing, opinionated discusion into receptive attitude, thoughtful speaking,
deep listening. It can be described as following:

_“The group gathers with a welcome, followed by a round of checking-in so that every voice can be heard. People articulate and respect agreements that define the role of individuals and how they will treat each other. Topic and intention guide the conversation. To elicit story and wisdom, practices of listening and speaking are observed. There is a way to pause the action and call for reflection. Decisions made, whether by consensus or hierarchical design are enhanced by hearing all points of view beforehand, and cooperation is facilitated by participation. Before people leave, there is a round of checking-out and a brief farewell.”_ 


## Training from the Back of the Room 
Training from the Back of the Room is an approach created by by Sharon L. Bowman to design and deliver engaging learning experiences that leverage 6 key principles of learning theory:
{% include image-full.html file="/2021/05/ptl1-2.JPG" alt="Topic" caption="TBR"   %}
When designing learning experiences, lessons are structured to address 4 Cs:

- **C1: Connections** : What does the learner already know about the topic? 
Connect learners with what they know, want to learn and with each other

- **C2: Concepts**  : What does the learner need to know about it?  
Ensure concepts are learnt in multidisciplinary ways

- **C3: Concrete Practice**  :  Can the learner do it or teach it to someone else?  
Allow new skills to be practiced or new learnings to be reviewed

- **C4: Conclusions** : How does the learner plan to use it?  
Summarise what has been learnt and how it can be used post training

## Checking out Reflections
Pause & Reflect - Process to Reflect on what we learned and what stays in heart and mind as we leave.
- How Do I Feel?
- What Happened?
- What Did I Learn?
- How Does this Relate to the Real World?
- What If ...
- What Next?

## Side Quest
- [How Will You Measure Your Life](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14FB0u5VhDHnDQrBr6L5zZMPWgXOMVI9qpxT6U46kMHc/edit)
- [The Circle Way Guidelines+English](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Ucj6fiKW3x6n60eZT9oEj5ZJiFGNTfJb/view)
- [Leading in a Learning Way](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1d72Sa9K_rqaIFoJjTLtll2LsccehjbgW/view)
- [Training from the Back of the Room](https://www.amazon.com/Training-Back-Room-Sharon-Bowman/dp/0787996629) 